<h>-5.0-conversion Quickstart Guide
-----------------------------------------
 _____________________________________________________
|  To read a chapter in this guide type:             |
|      read chapter <Chapter Number> of quickstart   |
|____________________________________________________|

It's recommended you read this entire leaflet before
attempting to play.  It'll answer a lot of questions
and it's rather short.

Chapters:
1) Introduction 
2) General Overview and Goals
3) Classes, Races, and Player Power
4) Attribute Types and the New Stat System 
5) Learning By Doing and Disciplines
6) Skill Sets, Diversity, and Pre-requisites
7) Future Plans
8) Afterword

INTRODUCTION

The main differences between earlier <h>s and this version are in the
race, stat, skill learning, and discipline systems.  Additionally, there are
geographical changes, and changes to the way some skills work, as well as
modifications to mage damage, faction code, how lag applies to casters. 
Other numerous smaller changes can be found listed in help files and in
the news. Lastly, there have been upgrades to utility functions like
color, auto, score and attribute. Combat formulas have been changed to
eliminate the tie-in between damage and weapon weights.  Combat relies
more on the players skill than the innate damage of the weapon he uses.

The use of Rent to control inventory levels is back in the MUD, and
factions will be implemented in full this version. High level experience
has been lowered somewhat and the classes are more balanced. The Azruzi
class has been taken out of the MUD and will be replaced by the Shaman
class soon after opening. Some of the classes are being made to
integrate better in groups than in past versions and there is an impetus
to getting more warriors of various races.

Most of the changes you will notice because they are obvious or because
they are in the help files. The rest of this document will be devoted to
general overview and to giving the rationales and reasons behind some of
the new systems and answering some of the frequently asked questions about
how and why we did things the way we did it. 

Please understand that a lot has changed. You may or may not like all of
the new structures although we hope you do.  All of them were designed to
try to adjust for perceived flaws and inconsistencies in past versions. We
believe that the new structures generally upgrade the MUD and respond to
player raised complaints, wishes and gripes. It is a given that we won't
please everyone with these changes, and we will have new problems, wishes
and gripes (and hopefully some compliments). Our long beta period has
worked through many of these problems which is the one thing we can thank
about our long beta.  We are also sure that we will find things we wished
we had implemented with this version as well. However, we hope and believe
that you will find this version a lot of fun. 

Last, we wish to again thank all the beta testers that have given
invaluable assistance in working out bugs and inconsistencies over the last
year.


GENERAL OVERVIEW AND GOALS

In general <h> 5.0 will differ from <h> 4.1 in that there will
be an increase reliance on both race and skill learning in deciding what
you can do and skill learning will be not just dependent on intelligence
and level but how long or often you have used a skill. Stats are important
but they are not an independent category.  They are majorly influenced by
your choice of race.  There are planned racial skills and attributes that
will further affect your character and which will help us to adjust
balances if needed. 

CLASSES, RACE, AND POWER

Note that, with some exceptions, any race can try to be any class, but
some of those combinations may not make good characters.  Your race gives
you a range of stats and you can only modify compared to a generic member
of your race.  Magic effect are no longer limited by racial maxes and
there are no set stat limits for multi's.  Multi-classes also have no
direct pre-reqs but will not be as powerful because of the relation of
stats to race and some of the changes to learning and fighting vs engaged
casting.  

Multi-classing has been taken out of the game although the code has not
been removed.  It is unlikely for them to come back in the game. The
intention is to add more hybrid classes in.

Hybrid classes such as Deikhan and Ranger have a number of overall
improvements that improve their playability but also are more limited as
casters now.  In fact, rangers no longer cast but have skills that border
on magic. Clerics as a whole were slightly downgraded by losing the pet
skills (put in the shaman class which will open after the mud goes into
production) and some changes to fighting/engaged casting and mages were
increased in power.  Monks and thieves were restructured.  Thieves have
new trap skills and monks are going through a pretty through change in
focus which may continue into 5.0 production. 

ATTRIBUTES TYPES AND THE NEW STAT SYSTEM

Stats are divided into Physical, Mental and Utility attributes.  There are
more of them and the scale is much broader than past versions of <h>,
growing by nearly a factor of 10.  This is a new system and will be unfamiliar.
We implemented in this manner so as to obtain more diversity in stats and to
make <h> more racial and skill based.  We also were highly motivated by
past balance meetings in which mortals asked us to 1) make stat more diverse
and 2) decrease the emphasis on warriors maxing their physical stats and
casters only maxing their mental stats.  We had no actual diversity on 4.1
even though theoretically it was possible.  The primary goal of our stat
system design was to try to make tradeoff between stats between equal value
stats.  Thus not every player would rob karma for strength or intelligence
depending on their class.

This area has been the most frequently asked question of the beta.  Why
can't you trade between categories.  Understand that our decision was
conscious and a decision not to allow it rather than something we didn't
think about.  We consciously do not allow tradeoffs between categories
because trade-offs between unequal stats was one of the major problems in
obtaining diversity on 4.1 and earlier versions.  Every warrior was stupid
and maxed their available strength, dex and con.  Every mage was smart and
weak.  The only place where there were differences was between 18 and 19
in a stat and a 12 was meaningless.  We are trying to eliminate that
problem in this new system. We may or may not allow bonus stats during
creation but will be unlikely to allow looting between categories of
unequal stats. Note that strength for a mage may not help him that much
but his trade off will be only against dex or con and be offset by race as
well.  It will not be trading a meaningful stat versus a non-meaningful
one.  If you want a certain type of character, look at the races first
before selecting your trade-offs.

One last note.  Physical stats are more important for warriors still but
we have adjusted at the code level (or will if bugged) for the fact that
warriors will not be maxed physically.  Mental stats do seem to affect
all PC's. Intelligence sets practices, Wisdom learning rates and focus how
well you perform a skill.  They are hopefully equal in importance and an
intelligent race warrior may have some advantages that offset his
detriments from his physical characteristics versus an ogre. That
intelligence may come from his race or from his tradeoffs within the race.

LEARNING BY DOING and DISCIPLINES

Learning comes from two places.  You obtain a skill set using practices
and you get actual learning by actually using the skills themselves.  This
includes combat and other automatic skills like dodge.  How learned a
person is will be a combination of the two systems and what combination
depends on the individual skill.  Please understand that we do not
consider learning rates structural.  If a learning rate seems to slow or
fast that is a balance issue and is now easy to fix.  We want to hear
about all balance issues without reservation.  Structural issues we want
to hear about but we also know that you can not please everyone.  Our
structures will only be modified if they are clearly not correct.  We are
aware of the tradeoffs that we have made for 5.0 (see section on balance
verse diversity) and believe we have gained more than we have lost in this
area.

Disciplines were re-organized into basic disciplines and advanced
disciplines.  All pre reqs were moved into your basic disciplines which
consist of 2-3 disciplines for each class.  One holds the basic skill of
the class.  The other holds basic combat or casting skills or learning
numbers.  You know learn adventuring and get your wizardry/faith level
directly from your guildmaster although you can also use (waste) practices
on them if you just have to get a skill early.  Tactics and evaluate are
part of the adventuring discipline now and combat is reserved for combat
skills.  Specialization comes after you have finished your basic
disciplines and you will get different practices/level and learn the
disciplines at different rates.  Again see separate section and help files
for full explanations. 
SKILL SETS, DIVERSITY, and PRE_REQUISITES

Players pre requisites have been centralized and this has allowed the
classes to be much more ordered and balanced at lower to mid levels.  This
was the primary motivation for the changes in these areas.  

In 4.1, a caster would get a spell that was designed for a level 15 mage
at level 5.  He would learn a spell like gust after that one rather than
before.  No spells were learned at the appropriate time except by
coincidence.  This caused us to put in complex pre-requisites and to put
weird things into classes to try to catch up to the weird skill sets. This
meant that in general, <h> 4.1 casters were identical between levels 20
and 25 because of pre requisites and unbalanced both before and after
those levels.  

Ultimately, the idea of full choice of skills at low levels is a balance
nightmare and, ultimately, we never even saw the diversity that was the
primary benefit desired by that system.  At low levels, there were clearly
preferred paths for every class because not every discipline can be equal.
The only people who didn't know were Newbies who didn't know better.  It is
very difficult to both give choice and make everything equal and make it
understandable.  We believe it is not possible to do that and maintain
balance.

We have substituted diversity in actual learning, racial diversity, and
have added meaningful specialization in place of diversity in practices. 
Specializations have meanings in the 5.0 systems where you do not max a
discipline in 8 levels of practice but must both use the skill and pick
the specialty when you get out of basic.  Every skill and spell is
associated with advanced disciplines and specialization will change the
affects of basic skills.  Some of these affects will be apparent (see help
files for some affects) some invisible and structural.  Using a skill will
increase your abilities of even basic skills in those specialties.  Know
that there are diversities in identically practiced players based on their
choices in using skills.  At higher levels, people will actually get
different skill sets as they sink practices into the advanced disciplines.

The above will explain why some advanced disciplines have no apparent
skills.  We hope to eventually have skills in every one but the discipline
learning has an independent affect.

In any event, please understand the reason why your low level choices are
more restricted.  It is so no character learns meaningless skills at
inappropriate levels.  Restricting choice was not our goal but the
trade-off for what we tried to accomplish.  It has allowed us to
immediately make the ranger and mage classes playable and it will allow us
to balance skills and classes easily against each other.

We believe that this will be more understandable to new comers to <h>
and increases the over-all enjoyability of the mud.  In looking at this
system please be aware that there are different diversities in place in
terms of what skills you use.  If you do not use bash versus kick, you
will have no bash and be as diverse as a 4.1 fighter who never got bash. 
There are less options but it will be more understandable and perhaps more
diverse. 

AFTERWORD

In addition to continued general coding and world building, the
implementors are aware of the following changes that can be expected
within version 5.0:

Shaman Class: The implementors plan on adding a shaman class to the mud
which will have the following features: brewing, drain spells, undead
pets, tasked healing.

Mage Class: Mages will have more complexity coded into the class. Damage
and duration amounts will be affected by weather and sector.  Mage
protection spells will also become more important when fighting a casting
mobile.

Cleric Class: Offensive prayers will be converted to tasking. Afflictions
will go through some changes in that most of the afflictions will be made
of short term duration.

Warrior Class: Smythe should finally be implemented although with some
limits.

Skills: Generally, we expect continued coding of detail into skills over
the next year including taking even better advantage of our discipline and
learning system.
AFTERWORD

All the Implementors, Coders, Immortals, and Builders of <h> welcome
you to the new version.  We hope you find it enjoyable.  Feel free to
consult us if you have questions that the help files and other books do
not answer. 

